---
title: "The not-so-fast evolution of mobile device authentication"
date: 2019-12-20T10:33:42+01:00
draft: true
---

Smartphones are keepers of extremely private and valuable information of their owners and users such as contact phone numbers and email addresses, social network credentials, user preferences, messages, chats and conversations. Moreover, smartphones give access to operations that imply a direct monetary cost. Apart from the typical telephony operations (calls, SMS, service subscriptions) for which the user might be charged, in the last years, smartphones have become fully fledged wallets (NFC-Payments, Google Wallet, Apple Pay, etc.), and access platforms for home banking services. This evolution certainly helps in the process of payments dematerialization, with advantages for both users (cashless payments) and national governments (improved money traceability). However, this implies that having access to a smartphone, might be equivalent to having direct access to the user’s money, potentially all of it. 

Protecting the smartphone from unauthorized accesses is thus of utmost importance. The scientific literature presents plenty of studies on protection from malicious mobile apps and the cooperation among security features of official app marketplaces, efforts from commercial antivirus producers and native security functionalities are proving to be sufficient in keeping the likelihood of a money-threating infection at negligible levels.  

On the other hand, stealing a smartphone or tablet, or getting temporarily unauthorized access to an unattended one, is an easy and pretty common event, unfortunately. 

Protecting from such an attack requires strong authentication mechanisms, paired with protection mechanisms that completely deny the access to the device functionalities and stored data when the user is not authenticated. 

Typical authentication mechanisms include PIN and password and are implemented in practically every smartphone. Being paired with protection mechanisms such as data encryption and app isolation mechanisms, prove to be quite secure, at least on more recent smartphones. Yes, as a matter of fact, adequate support for data encryption has been included only after Android 6.0 (yes, three years ago). Before that, Android was mainly relying on the protection mechanisms offered by the underlying Linux kernel and the stripping work performed by developers to remove or deny the access to the most critical security relevant functionalities. Hence, the introduction of a mechanisms which keeps the data encrypted when not used (and especially when the device is off) with a non-tamperable key, proved to be necessary and has been included after it was demonstrated several times how the native security mechanisms could be avoided. The non tamperability is ensured only in presence of a physical trusted storage, i.e. a physically separated memory storage accessible only through trusted apps. Thus, currently Android includes a secure storage for encryption keys, used also to memorize authentication credentials. This storage is not used only to authenticate the user to device, instead, it can also be exploited, in read-only, by third-party apps to verify the identity of the user when performing critical operations (such as Home Banking apps). This functionality, named Gatekeeper, has been introduced contextually to the storage for biometric authentication credentials, named Fingerprintd. Actually, Android already introduced in Ice Cream Sandwich (Android 4.0, year 2012) the Face Unlock service, which enabled the authentication via facial recognition. The idea of “unlocking the smartphone with a smile” had a good commercial impact, being immediately adopted also by competitors (Microsoft Authenticator, Apple Face ID), but was flawed under several aspects. The authentication classifiers where quite “forgiving”, allowing unauthorized users to login, sometime. The presence of false negatives was notified by Google itself, showing a warning when the Face Authentication method was selected, highlighting the possibility of unauthorized access. The technique was also not resilient to common attacks such as the one of using a photo of the device owner to perform the authentication. Finally, having to do a selfie practically every time you needed to unlock your smartphone, became unpractical, moving the user toward more classical PINs, or unlock patterns (today protected by Gatekeeper as well) for more practical authentication. However, the name Fingerprintd gives us quite good hints about what is the most common authentication mechanism used for the last years. Yes, the majority of mobile devices produced after 2016, all of the high tier ones, have fingerprint sensors. Fingerprint is an authentication method very accurate, practically impossible to trick and that requires a pretty low amount of resources. Fingerprint authentication memorizes the position of minutiae, i.e. the intersection points between edges and ridges of the skin on the human finger. The relative position of minutiae is what the biometric storage keeps to authenticate a user. Compared to PIN, Password and Facial Recognition, the fingerprint authentication is pretty less intrusive and accepted by users, still its implementation on smartphones present its weaknesses, which moves smartphone producers to use PIN and passwords as a safe fall mechanism. Of course, we do not assume that producers are afraid that the smartphone is tricked by that one person over 7 billion who owns exactly our same fingerprint.   The main weakness is instead imposed by the resolution of the fingerprint sensor. A high precision requires high resolution to correctly identify all the minutiae in a finger. Since a high resolution sensor increases the production costs, smartphone producers implement the fingerprint authentication considering it again a forgiving mechanism, which can still cause false negatives.  Password and PINs are thus still a safe backup, used to ask a certain authentication to the user at random times. Authentication via fingerprint also has other limitations, for example, a wet finger does not allow the sensor to recognise the fingerprint. In wet and hot weathers, a user will likely be asked to authenticate himself several times before he can actually get access to the device. For this reason, new experimental methodologies are being tested to authenticate the user. Among these methodologies, behavioural authentication appears to be the most promising: the user is authenticated on the base of a behavioural features which can also include biometric parameters. More in details, behavioural analysis learn how the user perform certain common actions and the user’s habits, arguing that is our behaviour and the way how we do things that identifies ourselves. If an unusual behaviour is observed, a potential unauthorized access is happening. This idea poses the basis to the paradigm of seamless authentication, which is dual to the one that we current use. In fact, through seamless authentication, the user is always logged in, she does not need to identify herself every time she wishes to use the device. However, the device locks itself when a suspicious behaviour is identified. The goal of seamless authentication is the one of being able to protect the device, without requiring any active user interaction, removing thus any bothering request of PINs, passwords and non-wet fingerprints. Some studies have been performed recently, which exploit the walking gait as a biometric/behavioural parameter to identify and authenticate a user by her walking pattern. The gait is influenced by so many parameters and it is so much complex that it is safe enough to assume that it is extremely difficult to find two persons with the exact same walking pattern. On the other hand, external parameters, such as shoes, physical conditions, body weight changes, etc. can impact on the standard gait of a person, causing thus possible false positives. Being able to filter these parameters and the combination with other behavioural features are possible directions to follow to reach the still quite far goal of effective and efficient seamless authentication. These tasks are challenging and having seamless authentication integrated on off-the-shelf smartphone seems still a bit far in time, but we will keep pushing toward it. 


